UNITED NATIONS — The United Nations children’s agency told its staff this week to avoid “nonessential travel” to the United States.
The United Nations office in Vienna, which hosts several agencies of the world body, told its staff not to bother showing up to previously scheduled visa interviews at the United States mission there.
And some meetings scheduled to be held in March on the sidelines of the Commission on the Status of Women, an annual session held at United Nations headquarters, are being canceled.
The impact of President Trump’s executive order, barring the nationals of seven Muslim-majority countries, is reverberating through the United Nations system, even though it does not affect foreign country envoys who have diplomatic passports. And Secretary General António Guterres has told his staff that he has “received assurances” that foreign nationals who have special visas because they work within the United Nations bureaucracy should be able to enter the United States, too. Or as he put it in a memorandum to the staff this week, “the order should not impact U.N. staff and their families” who are coming into the United States on so-called G4 visas.
But those who work for United Nations agencies that provide services in the field — establishing schools for refugee children, or advising governments on how to combat sex trafficking — are more likely to travel back and forth to the New York headquarters for meetings.
The United Nations children’s agency, known as Unicef, sent a memo to employees on Jan. 31, urging them to consider hosting meetings at a Unicef center in Budapest or through videoconferencing. “Avoid nonessential travel to United States,” its memo said. The memo goes on to warn of delays at airports and to travel to the United States only if their G4 visas are valid for at least three months.
Najwa Mekki, a United Nations spokeswoman, said the memo had been precautionary, and that meetings in New York would proceed as planned.
A memo from the United Nations office in Vienna, which houses several agencies, including the International Atomic Energy Agency, warned that staff members who were applying for visas other than the G4 category should hold off for now. It also said: “If you are a national of one of the restricted countries and plan to apply for a different category of visa than G-4: Do not schedule visa appointments and/or pay any visa fees at this time. If you already have an appointment scheduled, please DO NOT ATTEND your appointment. The U.S. Embassies will not be able to proceed with your visa interview.”
Women’s rights advocates had been expected to gather at United Nations headquarters for two weeks in March. This year, women from the banned countries are not expected to come.
