SEOUL, South Korea — The office of President Park Geun-hye of South Korea blocked investigators from searching its compound on Friday, creating a standoff between Ms. Park, who argues that she is the victim of a political witch hunt, and a special prosecutor who has accused her of bribery.
The team of investigators, led by Park Young-soo, the special prosecutor, arrived at the Blue House, the mountainside presidential compound, in the morning. Ms. Park, whose powers have been suspended, has been holed up there since the National Assembly voted to impeach her in December on charges of corruption and abuse of power.
The investigators presented Ms. Park’s office with a court-issued search warrant that identified her as a suspect accused of bribery and other crimes. They said they needed to search the offices of staff members to collect evidence.
But Ms. Park’s office stopped them at the gate, citing laws banning investigators from searching the compound without presidential consent. Prime Minister Hwang Kyo-ahn, who is the acting president and is a steadfast ally of Ms. Park’s, has not given such consent.
Ms. Park’s office said it could not allow prosecutors to search the offices, citing the need to protect military and other official secrets there, the same reason used when state prosecutors wanted to search Ms. Park’s office in October.
Instead, the office said it was willing to hand over documents requested by the investigators.
It is unclear whether the special prosecutor will try again to enter the Blue House. His team had wanted to search the presidential offices before they summoned Ms. Park for questioning, which could happen as early as next week.
Ms. Park has said she is willing to be questioned by the special prosecutor, although last year she refused to meet state prosecutors for questioning, accusing them of political bias.
She is facing an impeachment trial at the Constitutional Court, which will decide in the coming weeks whether to end her presidency formally or reinstate her.
Ms. Park faces charges that she colluded with a longtime confidante, Choi Soon-sil, to collect tens of millions of dollars in bribes from big businesses. She is also accused of abusing her power to punish or discriminate against journalists, artists and others deemed unfriendly to her government.
Several of Ms. Park’s former presidential advisers have been arrested on related charges. She and Ms. Choi have insisted on their innocence, accusing unspecified enemies of framing them.
During a rare interview with a right-wing podcast station last month, Ms. Park called the allegations against her “absurd” and “gigantic lies.”
“When I trace the way things have developed, I cannot help but feel that this has been planned for a long time,” Ms. Park said, without clarifying who she thought was responsible.
