UNITED NATIONS — Nikki R. Haley, the new American ambassador to the United Nations, condemned Russia on Thursday for its recent “aggressive actions” in eastern Ukraine.
“We do want to better our relations with Russia,” Ms. Haley said during her first remarks to an open briefing of the United Nations Security Council. “However, the dire situation in eastern Ukraine is one that demands clear and strong condemnation of Russian actions.”
She made it clear that American sanctions imposed after Russia’s annexation of Crimea would remain in place.
During her Senate confirmation hearing last month, Ms. Haley also expressed support for continuing the sanctions and accused Russia of committing war crimes in the Syrian conflict. But her strong criticism of the government of President Vladimir V. Putin put her at odds with President Trump, who has expressed a desire for warmer relations with the Kremlin.
Her Russian counterpart, Vitaly I. Churkin, told reporters after the meeting that it would be “frivolous” to speculate on whether the Trump administration would be friendlier than that of President Barack Obama.
“I don’t want to make any predictions,” Mr. Churkin said. “My intention is to try to do my best to establish a good working relationship with the head of the new U.S. delegation.”
“They’re just in their first few days,” he added.
Mr. Churkin said he expected to meet with Ms. Haley on Friday.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine escalated in recent days, after Mr. Trump spoke by phone on Saturday with Mr. Putin, whom Mr. Trump has said he admires.
Ukraine accused pro-Russian separatists of aggression. Mr. Putin, by contrast, blamed a financially struggling Ukraine, and its need for money from the international community, for the escalation. “The best way to get that,” Mr. Putin said Thursday on a visit to Budapest, “is to portray yourselves as victims of aggression.”
The Ukrainian ambassador, Volodymyr Y. Yelchenko, who presides over Security Council deliberations this month, accused Russia of carrying out war crimes.
